---
description: Machine learning to identify COVID-19-related contracts 
slug: relevancy-scoring-for-covid-19-procurement
title: "AI Use Case: Relevancy scoring for COVID-19 procurement"
---
Executive agencies are required to identify and track contracts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic response.
{: .intro }

Manually applied coding was incomplete or sometimes inaccurate. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has developed a machine learning algorithm to flag contracts likely COVID-related but not flagged as such for further review.

## Background

With the emergence of COVID-19, a National Interest Action Code was created in the Federal Procurement Data System (FPDS) and USASpending.gov to enable the tracking of pandemic-related federal contract spending. The Office of Procurement at the IRS trained a model to assess COVID contract reporting data quality. COVID spending is tracked using a series of codes, but these are subject to human error and do not produce a complete and accurate inventory of COVID-related contract spending. **The IRS wants to identify all contracts related to COVID-19 spending in order to create a comprehensive inventory.**

This machine learning-based tool helps agencies verify the accuracy and completeness of their COVID-19 contracting data.

## Responsible AI
Government subject matter experts reviewed the model to ensure the modeling team understood data definitions and procurement regulations. Further, independent code reviews were performed to check for coding errors and optimize the modeling approach. 


