---
description: AI supports 508 compliance in vendor solicitations
slug: ai-supports-508-compliance-vendor-solicitations
title: "AI Use Case: AI supports 508 compliance in vendor solicitations"
---
The Solicitation Review Tool (SRT), developed by the General Services Administration (GSA), uses artificial intelligence to review all proposals for vendors to provide services in [SAM.gov (beta)](https://beta.sam.gov/) and flags information communications proposals as compliant or non-compliant for Section 508 language.
{: .intro }

The SRT analyzes solicitations--proposals by federal agencies for vendors to provide services or products. SRT allows the agency soliciting the service to revise the contract prior to awarding it or to take steps to ensure future compliance. By using predictive analytics to assess more than 500 documents a day, SRT identifies more than 90 percent of documents that do not have the Section 508 language required for compliance.

[Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973](https://www.section508.gov/manage/laws-and-policies) requires federal agencies to make their electronic and information technology accessible to people with disabilities. This is called Section 508 compliant.
{: .ai-ucl-feature }

<br />

SRT was developed originally as a proof of concept by a GSA employee on a government furnished laptop and was used to assess information communications technology solicitations on FedBizOps. FedBizOps has since become part of the larger [SAM.gov (demo)](https://beta.sam.gov/).

## Background
Information communications technology purchased by the U.S. Government is required to be accessible to everyone, regardless of disability. Prior to the development of SRT, GSA Employees responsible for evaluating solicitations for 508 compliance were able to review approximately 1 percent of documents manually, often providing feedback on lack of compliance long after the contract was signed. **The goals of SRT are to review 100 percent of relevant documents for appropriate section 508 language and to move the review earlier in the procurement process, allowing acquisitions to revise the solicitation before awarding the contract, if possible.**

SRT reviews vastly more documents than a manual review could reasonably accomplish. By using AI to assess new documents every day, SRT can flag problematic solicitations before they are awarded, allowing section 508 coordinators to review the flagged solicitation and make a determination on whether it should be updated. **This leads to more compliance, resulting in better customer service.**

## Responsible AI

 - SRT uses no personally identifiable information (PII). 
 - The team plans to audit selected data annually to ensure ongoing accuracy.


## Where we go from here
The team would like to be able to tune the tool for even greater accuracy, which would require a commitment to provide additional documents for advanced training of the model. Those additional documents would need to be manually reviewed and scored, a labor-intensive process.

In the longer term, the team sees potential for SRT to be extended. Additional solicitations are managed through [eBuy](https://www.ebuy.gsa.gov/ebuy/), which could benefit from this tool. In addition, SRT could assess solicitations for inclusion of other required language, such as language on cybersecurity. 
