---
title: Looking for a Cloud Adoption Specialist to Join Centers of Excellence
layout: post
initiative: Cloud Adoption
date: June 9, 2018
excerpt: Do you want to be a part of a new fast-paced, cutting-edge group within the federal government? The GSA’s Centers of Excellence (CoE) are looking for the best and brightest to join the team!
---

Do you want to be a part of a new fast-paced, cutting-edge group within the federal government? The GSA’s Centers of Excellence (CoE) are looking for the best and brightest to join the team! The CoEs are an extension of GSA’s Technology Transformation Services and are focused on accelerating IT modernization to improve the citizen experience, improve outcomes, and reduce legacy IT spending across the government.

We’re looking for someone to join our team as the <a href="https://www.usajobs.gov/GetJob/ViewDetails/501933500">Centers of Excellence Cloud Adoption Specialist</a> at the GS-15 level. This key role will lead a team dedicated to helping agencies move away from legacy data centers and migrate to cloud and hybrid environments.

The ideal candidate for this role will be passionate about our mission, with top-notch experience in leading cloud adoption teams. Specifically, you will:

- Help federal agencies develop and execute cloud migration by applying cloud adoption technical knowledge, problem-solving analysis, and risk calculation to produce high-quality results, meeting customer expectations and organizational goals.
- Promote the adoption of modern technology practices through teaching, coaching, and knowledge sharing.
- Practice an exceptional level of customer service with all partners, providing a unique, tailored experience.

You can find out more by reading about the <a href="https://join.tts.gsa.gov/join/cloud-adoption-specialist/">CoE Cloud Adoption Specialist</a> position.

<a href="{{site.baseurl}}/coe/cloud-adoption.html#coe-updates" class="usa-button">More Cloud Adoptoion Posts</a>
