---
title: The OCDO, Coming to an Agency Near You
layout: post
initiative: Data and Analytics
date: June 25, 2019
---
By the HUD Data and Analytics Center of Excellence

**This is the part of the new Data and Analytics CoE OCDO Series...**

*What is an OCDO?*

An organization’s implementation of an Office of the Chief Data Officer (OCDO) should help promote the intersection 
between policies, processes, and people responsible for managing data as a strategic asset. The Centers of Excellence are 
helping customer agencies define roles better by bridging technical expertise with the customer agency's organizational 
expertise. Defining the roles and responsibilities for the OCDO is new territory for federal departments and agencies. 
For the OCDO to be successful, diverse expertise in business, technology, innovation, and change management will be necessary.
The 2018 <a href="https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/4174/text">Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act (FEBP)</a> states “the head of each agency shall designate a nonpolitical 
appointee employee in the agency as the Chief Data Officer of the agency” and leaves the organizational structure and 
resources to agencies themselves.

The coordination of technology, data, and business priorities will be the primary focus of the OCDO as it continues to develop 
and evolve. The OCDO should support high quality, integrated data assets that are easily shared and accessed, and proactively 
used by staff and managers for operations, decision-making, and planning internally with delivery partners. Working with the 
CTO or CIO, the CDO should also ensure that tools and training are available for all levels of business users, including those 
with limited or no technical experience. Determining the full extent of this office’s role will require the enterprise to 
self-reflect on its organizational vision.

Finding where your OCDO should fit in the organization and establishing clear roles and responsibilities within the 
organizational structure can be challenging. The current legislation and guidance (e.g., FEBP, Open Data Act, etc.) provides 
a substantive set of requirements for the OCDO. When combined with an agency’s specific needs, these foundational documents 
provide the baseline for a successful OCDO.

<a href="{{site.baseurl}}/coe/data-analytics.html#coe-updates" class="usa-button">More Data & Analytics Posts</a>
