---
title: "Ten Plays of Our Infrastructure Optimization Approach"
layout: post
initiative: Contact Center
date: October 2, 2020
---
By the Contact Center - Center of Excellence

<h2>Contents:</h2>
- <a href="#Introduction">Introduction</a>
- <a href="#Key Concepts">Key Concepts</a>
- <a href="#Play1">Play 1: Conduct Contact Center Inventory</a>
- <a href="#Play2">Play 2: Assess Customer Landscape</a>
- <a href="#Play3">Play 3: Assess Workforce Structure</a>
- <a href="#Play4">Play 4: Assess Employee Experience</a>
- <a href="#Play5">Play 5: Assess Customer Experience</a>
- <a href="#Play6">Play 6: Conduct Cost Analysis</a>
- <a href="#Play7">Play 7: Create an Agile Infrastructure</a>
- <a href="#Play8">Play 8: Determine Contact Center Maturity</a>
- <a href="#Play9">Play 9: Integrate Contact Center Center Services & Customer Strategy</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 10: Design Future State Vision</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 11: Design Future State Roadmap</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 12: Determine Contracting Model for Contact Center Services</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 13: Build and Maintain Enterprise-wide Knowledge Solution</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 14: Leverage Innovative Technology</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 15: Promote Change Management and Continuous Improvement</a>
- <a href="#Download">Related Resources</a>

<h2><a id="Introduction"></a>Introduction</h2>
The federal government spends over $20 billion a year on contact centers, primarily on outdated technology and processes. Improving customers’ experience when accessing, engaging, and interacting with an agency through contact centers will have a significant impact on their overall experience with government. Our customers deserve seamless support in accessing government services to complete their transaction or accomplish their task.

The President’s Management Agenda (PMA) and Cross-Agency Priority (CAP) goals showcase the government’s focus on improving the customer experience when accessing information and services. Contact centers play a crucial role in an agency’s CAP goal strategy, since they are a critical touchpoint to understanding the customer experience and identifying opportunities to fix or improve.   

The Contact Center Center of Excellence (CoE)’s team helps improve contact center delivery services and customer interactions. We developed a 15-play Playbook for federal government agencies who are looking to modernize and optimize their contact centers. While not every play will apply to your agency, these plays will get you started. The Contact Center CoE developed this Playbook according to relevant laws, policies, and guidance. 

<h2><a id="Key Concepts"></a>Key Concepts</h2>
Throughout this document, we will refer to the following key concepts:
-**Artificial Intelligence (AI) –** AI consists of a group of technologies that when combined can automate time intensive and often expensive tasks to do by hand. These technologies fall into two groups: technologies that improve perception (the ability to recognize, such as natural language processing) or improve cognition (the ability to interpret and solve problems, such as machine learning). 
-**Customer Relationship Management System (CRM) –** CRM is a tool to capture, consolidate, and analyze data on customer interactions. Its goal is to help  organizations recognize and communicate with customers.
-**Emerging Technology –** Cloud-based emerging technologies driven by private-sector investments are revolutionizing the contact center space. 
-**Knowledge Management –** Knowledge management is a discipline that promotes an integrated approach to identifying, capturing, evaluating, retrieving, and sharing all of an organization’s information assets. These assets may include databases, documents, policies, procedures, and previously uncaptured expertise and experience in individual staff members.
-**Omni-Channel –** Omni-Channel integration enables a consistent brand experience regardless of the technology or method of communication customers choose to use. It also enables seamless transition among various contact channels (e.g., data from an email must be usable by an agent that later has a phone call with the customer).
-**Quality Monitoring –** Listening to an agent’s telephone calls to assess the quality of work associated with the call measures customer service skills, accuracy of information provided, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), and data entry.  
-**Training –** Thoroughly training customer service representatives from the beginning saves time, increases first call resolution, prevents mistakes, and reduces the number of repeat callers. 
-**Workforce Management –** The art and science of having the right number of agents, at the right times, to answer an accurately forecasted volume of incoming calls at the service-level standard set by the contact center.

<h2><a id="Play1"></a>Play 1: Inventory Contact Center</h2>
Inventory all contact centers and other entry points to get a necessary foundation. That foundation will allow you to extend current state research, and give insight into current state oversight and fragmentation of contact centers.

To understand your agency’s current contact center landscape, you’ll need to first identify the stakeholders involved in managing the contact center. Next, list any research targets for the current state assessment (e.g., sites to visit, costs to assess, channels to consider). Last, agree on a common definition of a contact center to use for the project’s duration (e.g., any communications channel or group of channels through which personnel respond to inbound inquiries from external customers).

<h3>Checklist</h3>
- How does your agency define a contact center?
- Through what communications channels does your agency address inbound customer inquiries?
- How many contact centers does your agency have?
- Are these contact centers formal or informal?
- How many formal contact centers does your agency have?
- How are formal contact centers differentiated (e.g., by program area)?
- Does your agency have centralized oversight over all contact centers?
- Which organization(s) or individual(s) oversee your agency’s contact centers?
- How many entry points (1-800 numbers, service centers, email addresses, etc.) does your agency have?
- If you outsource contact centers, what is the contract model, number, and period of performance for each outsourced contact center?

<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- How many contact centers and entry points does your agency have?
- Does your agency have an enterprise-wide view of your contact centers?


<h2><a id="Play2"></a>Play 2: Assess Customer Landscape</h2>
Insight into customer segmentation and preferences will enable your agency to understand which customer needs they are currently serving and which they are ignoring. Eventually, these needs will inform the development of an experience tailored to the agency’s unique customer base.

To assess the landscape, you’ll need to understand who your agency’s contact centers serve. Then, determine the overall mission and focus of the agency’s contact centers. Identify what you need to do to successfully serve these customers. Finally, you’ll need to understand the agency’s current approach to customer research.

<h3>Checklist</h3>
- What information is your agency currently collecting on customers and their preferences?
- How is this information used?
- What tools do you use now to conduct customer research (e.g., surveys, focus groups)?
- What customer segments does your agency serve?
- Does your agency have any legal obligation to work with these customer segments?
- What percentage of overall contact center activity is made up by each customer segment?
- Are there non-customer external constituents who use contact centers (e.g., partners)?
- Does your agency prioritize certain customer interactions over others?
- Which contact channels do customers prefer to use?
- What are the most common questions?

<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- Who uses your agency’s contact centers?
- Why are they using your agency’s contact centers?


<h2><a id="Play3"></a>Play 3: Assess Workforce Structure</h2>
Contact centers require customized staffing scenarios that consider factors such as inquiry complexity, channel types, customer preferences, necessary and available skills, and contact cadence. Understanding an agency's workforce dynamics clarifies how to best address these factors.

To assess the structure, you’ll want to identify the current workforce breakdown. Find out if they assess their staffing needs and if they are currently met, missed, or exceeded. Then gather information to estimate workforce costs and understand the policies and dynamics (e.g., union) that affect staffing.

<h3>Checklist</h3>
- How many agents and supervisors are in each contact center?
- How many management personnel (e.g., site directors, quality managers) are in each contact center?
- How many personnel are federal employees?
- How many personnel are contractors?
- What is the contact center’s grade or SCA structure?
- What are the required skills (e.g., technical, language)?
- Are there any skill gaps?
- How are agents scheduled (e.g., workforce management tool)?
- What is the telework policy for agents or other staff?
- What union restrictions affect staffing?

<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- What is the staff composition (number of federal staff and contractors) of your agency’s contact centers?
- What are your contact centers’ staffing requirements?

<h2><a id="Play4"></a>Play 4: Assess Employee Experience</h2>
Understanding employee experience provides critical insight into the root causes of customer experience failures and gaps. This understanding will make it easier to improve process, training, and evaluation to support a more customer-centric workforce.

To assess employee experience, first analyze the connection between customer experience and employee experience at the agency, as happy employees lead to happy customers. 

Identify specific tools and processes to improve to get a more empowered workforce. Assess the current landscape for employee performance evaluation. Then learn how agents are trained and identify training gaps. 

<h3>Checklist</h3>
- How does your agency or contractor measure employee engagement?
- Are your employees engaged and satisfied?
- How engaged and satisfied are your employees?
- Do employees use tools and processes (e.g., CRM, knowledge management) to support inquiry resolution?
- Are there tools or processes that employees want to have so they can better manage inquiries or streamline operations?
- How does your agency or contractor measure employee performance?
- Do performance plans reflect customer-focused goals and competencies?
- How are employees recognized for customer-focused achievements?
- What is your agency’s training structure for agents?

<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- Does your agency empower employees to provide excellent customer service?
- Does your agency use the right tools to assess employee experience?

<h2><a id="Play5"></a>Play 5: Assess Customer Experience</h2>
To improve the contact center customer experience, your agency must first understand how contact centers fit into your customers’ overall journey.

To assess the customer experience, you’ll need to agree on a common understanding of customer experience and your contact centers’ role in it. 

Create a current state customer journey map (or maps). This map will help you understand which factors impact customer experience inside—and outside of—contact centers. Then you can identify customer pain points as you prioritize recommendations.

<h3>Checklist</h3>
- What touchpoints do customers have with your agency?
- What are the key interactions that inform or change customers’ impressions of the agency (moments of truth)?
- How are customer interactions linked across channels and programs?
- Does your agency answer calls or emails soon enough for your customers?
- Are these responses accurate?
- Are agency representatives (e.g., CSRs) friendly and helpful?
- Which technologies directly (e.g., telephony) or indirectly (e.g., CRM) impact customer experience?
- What are your customers’ greatest pain points during their contact center experience?

<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- Does your agency understand contact centers in the context of the full customer experience?
- What changes could make pain points less painful?

<h2><a id="Play6"></a>Play 6: Conduct Cost Analysis</h2>
When assessing a contact center’s current state, consider not only tangible but also intangible costs, which are costs that may not be fully reflected in financial data, but have real impact on spending and service. Considering both costs will help you identify opportunities to save.

To calculate your agency’s contact centers’ cost, you’ll need to understand how your agency manages its contact centers. Compare your agency’s contact center costs to benchmarks, then identify savings opportunities so you can provide a foundation to project  future state costs.

<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Who is responsible for overseeing contact center financial systems?
- What tangible costs do contact centers incur?
  - Staffing
  - Facilities
  - Technology (Licenses, O&M)
  - Equipment
  - Training
  - Translation services
  - Overhead
- What intangible costs do contact centers incur?
  - Productivity losses (e.g., lost time)
  - Service failures (e.g., incorrect information)
  - Risks (e.g., reputational liability)
  - How do your agency’s contact center costs compare to best-in-class contact centers?

<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- How much do contact centers cost your agency?
- What intangible costs do contact centers incur?
- Is your agency’s current contact center spending reasonable?

<h2><a id="Play7"></a>Play 7: Identify Contact Center Best Practices</h2>
Understanding contact center best practices will allow your agency to identify gaps and develop a future state vision that supports best-in-class people, processes, and technologies.

To identify best practices, you’ll need to establish a benchmark vision of your agency’s ideal contact center, tailored to your agency’s unique needs. Then define the ideal state against which to compare the current state. Identify success factors that you can adopt. Last, you show that transforming your agency is possible by sharing examples of peer agencies’ successes.

<h3>Checklist</h3>
- What makes certain contact centers succeed in the following areas?
  - Acquisition support
  - Change management
  - Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
  - Hiring and recruiting
  - Innovation
  - Knowledge management solution
  - Omni-channel experience
  - Performance management
  - Quality assurance
  - Security and privacy
  - Staffing optimization
  - Training and development
- How do leading contact centers with similar missions or constraints approach contact center operations?
- What has enabled successful contact center transformations in similar agencies?

<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- What does contact center success look like?
- How have peer agencies achieved this ideal?

<h2><a id="Play8"></a>Play 8: Determine Contact Center Maturity</h2>
Independent assessments of each individual contact center provide granular insights into the enterprise-wide contact center landscape. These granular insights make it easier to analyze gaps and inconsistencies across all contact centers.

To determine the maturity of each, first establish a baseline understanding of the tools, standards, and processes each contact center uses. 

Then compare contact centers to each other in order to identify internal best practices to share. Compare agency contact centers to best-in-class contact centers to identify opportunities to improve.

<h3>Checklist</h3>
- How does each contact center compare to best-in-class contact centers among the following components?
  - Agent desktop and Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
  - Hosting, network, and security
  - Knowledge/content management
  - Operations delivery model and operating standard
  - Operating procedures library
  - Quality management
  - Reporting
  - Telephony platform and Integrated Voice Response (IVR)
  - Training
  - Workforce management
- How varied is contact center maturity across the agency?

<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- What people, process, and technology improvements can your agency make to improve operational efficiency and customer experience?


<h2><a id="Play9"></a>Play 9: Assess Employee Experience</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play10"></a>Play 10: Assess Employee Experience</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play11"></a>Play 11: Assess Employee Experience</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play12"></a>Play 12: Assess Employee Experience</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play13"></a>Play 13: Assess Employee Experience</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play14"></a>Play 14: Assess Employee Experience</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play15"></a>Play 15: Assess Employee Experience</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>
