---
title: "Nine Plays of Our Cloud Adoption Approach"
layout: post
initiative: Cloud Adoption
date: September 18, 2020
---
By the Data & Analytics Center of Excellence

<h2>Contents:</h2>
- <a href="#Introduction">Introduction</a>
- <a href="#Key Concepts">Key Concepts</a>
- <a href="#Play1">Play 1: Create Business Alignment</a>
- <a href="#Play2">Play 2: Align and Engage Stakeholders</a>
- <a href="#Play3">Play 3: Identify an Empowered Leader</a>
- <a href="#Play4">Play 4: System Inventory & Application Rationalization</a>
- <a href="#Play5">Play 5: Develop Cloud Migration Plan</a>
- <a href="#Play6">Play 6: Develop New Cloud Capabilities</a>
- <a href="#Play7">Play 7: Strategic Communications</a>
- <a href="#Play8">Play 8: Pilot Solutions</a>
- <a href="#Play9">Play 9: Iterate</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 10: Embrace Continuous Process Improvement</a>
- <a href="#Download">Related Resources</a>

<h2><a id="Introduction"></a>Introduction</h2>
Today’s challenging missions require modern IT to move in lockstep with the business. The cloud enables agile feature delivery, which makes customers happy, and enhances cybersecurity to better protect systems and data. To get these results, agencies will need to think, work, and buy technology differently. Cloud adoption empowers agencies to modernize processes, cybersecurity, and workforce skills.  

The Cloud Adoption Center of Excellence (CoE) analyzes systems and applications to recommend optimal pathways to modernization using cloud adoption. The team developed a 9-play Playbook to help agencies deliver modern digital services using cloud services. While not every play will apply to your agency, they can help you work towards adopting modern cloud computing practices to support your mission. The Cloud Adoption CoE developed this Playbook according to relevant laws, policies, and guidance.

<h2><a id="Key Concepts"></a>Key Concepts</h2>
Throughout this document, we will refer to the following key concepts:
- **Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) -** Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) is a service model that delivers computer infrastructure on an outsourced basis to support enterprise operations. Typically, IaaS provides hardware, storage, servers and data center space or network components; it may also include software.

- **Platform as a Service (PaaS) -** Platform as a Service (PaaS) describes a computing platform that is rented or delivered as an integrated solution, solution stack, or service through an Internet connection.
Software as a Service - Software as a Service (SaaS) is a model for distributing software where customers access software over the Internet. In SaaS, a service provider hosts the application at its data center, and a customer accesses it via a standard web browser.

- **Serverless -** Serverless is the native architecture of the cloud that enables customers to only be concerned about developing and running software code and shift all of the cloud operational responsibilities to Cloud Service Providers (CSP), improving their own agility and innovation. Serverless offers practically endless scaling, allowing customers to pay only for the resources and services they use. Customers do not need to keep the frontend and database servers running when nothing is happening on their site. Serverless allows customers to build and run applications and services without worrying about servers to manage, software to install, or runtimes to maintain or administer.  

- **Microservices -** An approach to application development in which a large application is built as a suite of modular components or services. Every module supports a specific task or business goal. Each uses a simple, well-defined interface, such as an application programming interface (API), to communicate with other sets of services. It’s a design pattern that can be built using various technologies and stacks; it doesn’t rely on any particular technology.

<h2><a id="Play1"></a>Play 1: Create Business Alignment</h2>
Many executives still believe that cloud computing is about technology. It’s not. Cloud is a new model for using and delivering digital services securely and quickly.  
Successful cloud adoption requires aligning business value with a technology transformation strategy and agile implementation plan. Because cloud-based IT modernization projects focus on enabling business practices, you’ll have more relevant stakeholders than with more traditional IT initiatives. 
Shifts in cloud markets and technologies, price pressures from oversight and compliance, and demand for more cloud-based service features, quality, and bandwidth combine to make cloud-based modernization challenging. 
The ability to deliver capabilities faster while reducing the cost of delivery is driving federal IT transformation, **with the most common objectives being:** 
- Cost optimization
- Faster time to market 
- Assured quality
- Effective security and control
- Better customer experience
- Future readiness
Rapidly adopting modern cloud services provides a real opportunity to effectively attain your agency’s transformation requirements. 
<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Agency leadership should set the direction for modernization and define customer-centric outcomes that cloud computing technologies can enhance.

<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- How will modern cloud computing services improve your agency’s customer experience?
- How will modern cloud computing help your agency better deliver its mission?
- What are some of the initiatives you could launch if you had access to modern IT services like artificial intelligence (AI), robotic process automation (RPA), API-enabled web services, and data management services with a reduced maintenance burden? 

<h2><a id="Play2"></a>Play 2: Align and Engage Stakeholders</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play3"></a>Play 3: Identify an Empowered Leader</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play4"></a>Play 4: System Inventory & Application Rationalization</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play5"></a>Play 5: Develop Cloud Migration Plan</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play6"></a>Play 6: Develop New Cloud Capabilities</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play7"></a>Play 7: Strategic Communications</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play8"></a>Play 8: Pilot Solutions</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play9"></a>Play 9: Iterate</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>
