---
title: "Customer Experience Playbook"
layout: post
redirect_from: 2020-08-12-cx-update-19.md
initiative: Customer Experience
---
By The Customer Experience Center of Excellence Team

<h2>Contents:</h2>
- <a href="#Introduction">Introduction</a>
- <a href="#Key Concepts">Key Concepts</a>
- <a href="#Play1">Play 1: Choose Your Projects Strategically</a>
- <a href="#Play2">Play 2: Set Goals and Expectations</a>
- <a href="#Play3">Play 3: Identify Your Customers</a>
- <a href="#Play4">Play 4: Walk in Your Customer’s Shoes</a>
- <a href="#Play5">Play 5: Share and Act on Recommendations</a>
- <a href="#Play6">Play 6: Build a Service Catalog</a>
- <a href="#Play7">Play 7: Measure What Matters</a>
- <a href="#Play8">Play 8: Analyze and Publish Metrics</a>
- <a href="#Play9">Play 9: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 10: Get Your Bearings</a>
- <a href="#Play11">Play 11: Build a Partnership</a>
- <a href="#Play12">Play 12: Establish Your Foundation</a>
- <a href="#Play13">Play 13: Foster a Customer-Centric Mindset</a>
- <a href="#Download">Download the PDF</a>

<h2><a id="Introduction"></a>Introduction</h2>
Customer Experience ( CX) is not new industry has been doing CX for a long time. Agencies may already be applying some or all of these best practices. 

What is new is the government’s central focus on CX with efforts such as the President’s Management Agenda (PMA) for improving customer experience, the 21st Century Integrated Digital Experience Act (IDEA), and the Federal Agency Customer Experience (FACE) Act to support CX practices. All of these efforts emphasize the government’s focus on improving the customer experience with accessing information and services. 

The Customer Experience Center of Excellence (CoE) works to develop a better understanding of
customer needs. The CX-CoE team is translating those findings into action. The team developed this
13-play playbook for practitioners in all levels of government to establish or improve CX practices,
and to foster a CX mindset within—and across—government agencies. While not every play will apply,
they can help your agency get started with small, quick wins to build up expertise and gain confidence.

This playbook represents a synthesis of ideas gathered from interviewing several subject-matter
experts (SMEs) and leaders in CX and Human-Centered Design (HCD). This synthesis is according to
relevant laws, policies, and guidance, including the updated OMB Circular A-11 “Managing Customer
Experience and Improving Service Delivery.” Whether you are just curious about CX, already dabbling
in CX, or a professional CX practitioner, this playbook can offer insight to enhance your agency’s CX
presence.

<h2><a id="Key Concepts"></a>Key Concepts</h2>
Throughout this document, we will use the following key concepts: 
- **Framework** -  A set of methodologies and approaches for delivering a product/service
  - **Human-Centered Design (HCD)**: A framework of processes that integrates a broad set of practices around understanding
 the needs, wants, and limitations of people interacting with a product/service, and that involves those people in the
 design process. It includes User-Centered Design (UCD), which deals with a person’s interaction with a digital product.
- **Methodologies** -  A set of rules governing the design effort, depending on the focus
  - **Human-Centered Design (HCD)**: A broad application of HCD to focus on the entire customer’s journey to achieve a
 particular outcome, and identify their pain points and moments of delight to help prioritize design tasks. HCD
 encompasses other method as needed.
  - **Service Design**: Focuses on understanding and improving the quality of various interactions among users, service
 personnel, and backstage actors to deliver a service.
  - **User Experience (UX)/User Interface (UI) Design**: Related disciplines focusing respectively on the end-user’s experience
 with specific digital products as part of their overall journey, and how the user gets information from,and interacts with
 specific applications and websites.
- **Approach** - Outlines the specific process used to execute the design and development
  - **Design Thinking**: General human-centered methodology of discover, design, prototype, test, implement, and repeat. Intensely collaborative and iterative with a goal to develop something useful to end users.
  - **Data**: 
    - **Quantitative**: focused on quantifying the problem by way of generating numerical data or data that can be transformed into usable statistics. It quantifies attitudes, opinions, behaviors, and other defined variables and generalizes results from a larger sample population
    - **Qualitative**: focused on establishing answers to the whys and hows of questions (unlike quantitative). Qualitative research involves asking participants about their experiences of things that happen in their lives. It enables stakeholders to obtain insights into what it feels like to be another person and to understand the world as another experiences it. Findings are described in writing, rather than numbers.
    - **Operational**: Establish key performance metrics such as KPI, ROI, Quality Assurance, marketing outcomes, employee satisfaction and customer satisfaction.

<h2><a id="Play1"></a>Play 1: Choose Your Projects Strategically</h2>
As you start, find a range of projects that can benefit the most from CX methods. Look for those key customer challenges that have high visibility and high impact, but lack a key owner. You must be able to tackle these key challenges in small sections so you can gain quick wins. Succeeding in the right initial projects will help build trust in your capabilities and prove the value of CX at your agency organization.

<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Use data to help identify these:
  - Leadership’s high-visibility initiatives
  - Opportunities to save money (e.g., consolidating similar surveys)
  - Persistent customer issues
  - Existing metrics that could use a CX perspective (e.g., call-center data, operational KPI data, any customer/employee survey data)
- Look for projects that have high customer impact but require low effort to get traction (e.g., save customers time, make things easier, decrease employee burden)
- Start small and get quick wins to gain confidence, build trust, and generate momentum. Focus on one or two customer needs instead of their entire journey while you learn the techniques and develop expertise
- Find projects that will have concrete results and measure their real change or progress over time.
- Data: 
  - Gather data about where the most customer interactions are concentrated
  - Find out which programs fund the most services
  - Obtain report of dollars currently spent on customer feedback and contact centers
  - Collect reports from contact centers of high-volume customer pain points
  - Create journey maps to identify high-impact customer pain points
  - Review existing key performance indicators (KPIs) and metrics
- Tools: 
  - Review current CX CAP goal resources and match to leadership goals
  - Prepare an impact/effort matrix for potential projects to find high- impact low-effort options
  - Compare existing survey tools to identify opportunities to reduce duplication or overlap
- Engagement: 
  - Work with leadership to learn which projects are of highest priority to them
  - Understand customer engagement, team missions, and rules and regulations to identify partnership opportunity
<h3>Key Question</h3>
- Which projects can show high value with the least effort and cost?

<h2><a id="Play2"></a>Play 2: Choose Your Projects Strategically</h2>
Many of your stakeholders (and even your leadership) won’t know your CX’s purpose and methods. Explain your goals and manage expectations so you get them to cooperate. Above all, make sure you listen: not just to your external customers, but also to your internal customers and stakeholders, too.
<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Identify business owner(s) who will eventually take over the work
- Identify success metrics
- Define a specific customer goal or objective to drive the research.
- Work backwards from the goal to plan relevant research activities. Example: “We want a person to easily get a passport in seven days.”
- Determine where your stakeholders are largely focused: on technology, on business needs, on human resources, or on customer impact. Often, your project will start emphasizing one of these, and you may need to steer your stakeholders to re-balance these four elements
- Assure stakeholders the purpose is not to audit current operations, but rather simply to listen, above all else, to customers/staff about their experiences
- Prepare a written agreement (e.g. Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), engagement letter) describing the goals and approach of the activity, planned tasks and schedule, and level of participation for all parties
- Maintain flexibility to adjust the plan as you learn more about the customer
- Data: Identify the business owner(s) to gain access to data
- Tools: 
  - Obtain a signed MOU, engagement letter, Interagency Agreement, or ad hoc/informal letter of agreement
  - Prepare a project work plan
- Engagements: 
  - Get executive sponsorship
  - Talk to other stakeholders who may be affected by or interested in this project
  - Understand the constraints of stakeholders to build trust so that you can shift your approach as needed without losing momentum

<h3>Key Question</h3>
- Is the problem statement of your research for the selected project clear to you and your stakeholders?

<h2><a id="Play3"></a>Play 3: Identify Your Customers</h2>
Before you can understand your customers, you have to know
who they are. Then you can create personas representing your
different customer types. You’ll use those personas as
reference points to focus your thinking on your customers as
you develop solutions to meet their needs.
<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Identify who your program/agency/cross-agency
consortium serves, which may include internal and
external agencies, vendors, citizens, and employees
- Document a persona (i.e.,fact-based yet fictional
representation) for each customer you identify, capturing
demographics, preferences, and activities related to your
program/service and desired outcomes. Show that you not
only identify your customers, you actually understand
them
- Data:
  - Collect data about visitors to the website, call center,
social media, but use the data cautiously—not all
visitors to these channels are your customers
  - Identify unique characteristics that clearly
distinguish specific customers from one another
(e.g., programs they participate in, products they
produce, etc.)
  - Review existing customer segmentation data—a
persona could represent a defined segment
- Tools: 
  - Synthesize existing customer insights to determine
who your customers are and what motivates them
  - Have workshops to select traits and have a picture
(e.g., photograph or illustration) that belong to each
persona to bring the persona to life
- Engagement: 
  - Interview a sample of the customers to gain insights
into their values, needs, perspectives, and pain
points
  - Involve a cross-functional group of stakeholders to
get many perspectives
<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- Who are your customers (whether direct or
indirect)?
- How well do you know them?
  
<h2><a id="Play4"></a>Play 4: Walk in Your Customer’s Shoes</h2>
Once you’ve identified your customers and done your initial
research, you can truly understand your customers and
their needs. You’ll use a variety of techniques to gather
qualitative and quantitative information about your
customers’ experiences from their point of view when they
interact with your organization.
<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Develop a customer journey map for your program/service, including activities and
touchpoints with your agency. Highlighting pain points, points of delight, moments
of truth, and the customer’s emotional state. Make sure the journey map
addresses service recovery to understand what the customer's experience when
something happens that they don’t expect.
  - To build further empathy and understand the entire customer experience,
consider also developing a broader journey map that describes your
customer’s overall objective, of which your program may be just one step.
The broader journey may even include other agencies. For example, the
journey a new business owner takes to obtain a permit is just one piece of a
broader journey that includes obtaining licenses, finding and building out
space, having inspections, getting insurance, hiring employees, etc.
  - For a deeper dive, consider blending the journey map with your business
process map to demonstrate the full design required to deliver the service
depicted in the journey 
- Review existing customer feedback, both qualitative (e.g., surveys with open
text/seeking opinions, interviews, roundtables, etc.), and quantitative (e.g. surveys
yes/no, scaled questions, website analytics) to learn your customers’ direct and
indirect preferences.
- Document your work at each step: what you did and how you did it, both for future
efforts and to share knowledge
- Gather and document lessons learned after each activity to capture what went well
and what needs work. You can use these for new activities and future projects.
- Data:
  - Review existing customer feedback data: social listening reports, contact center trends
  - Capture information about the customer journey: touchpoints, experiences, technology used
- Tools:
  - Select from various methods for working with customers and
stakeholders to get feedback, develop options, and set priorities,
described by GSA 18F here: <a><href="https://methods.18f.gov/"><a/>
  - Conduct qualitative research: ethnographic interviews, customer
roundtables, town halls, listening tours, surveys, journey mapping
  - Prepare and circulate workshop reports to describe the activities and outcomes
- Engagement:
  - Provide access to—and build relationships with—your customers in person
  - Work with leadership and customer-facing staff to identify candidate locations and individuals to interview
  - Get buy-in from local offices
  - Hold workshops with stakeholders to keep them informed and to help prioritize upcoming activities
<h3>Key Question</h3>
- What does a customer experience and feel
while accessing your program/ service across
multiple channels?

<h2><a id="Play5"></a>Play 5: Share and Act on Recommendations</h2>
After you’ve done your research, you’ll need to synthesize
the data, analyze your findings, highlight insights, and
prioritize recommendations. You must be able to effectively
communicate your work so your stakeholders and leaders
understand the impact of your findings and proposed
solutions.
<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Find out how to improve the customer experience using various methods:
  - Develop tools that can help solve customer problems (e.g., write the
customer’s name on a cup to personalize the experience; give customers
a handout showing their customer journey at the beginning to reduce
their anxiety; hire the right staff to perform unique functions, train staff
for specific skills, etc.)
  - Deploy technology that addresses customer preferences (e.g., va.gov
uses a single portal so customers can get multiple veteran benefits)
  - Establish engagement opportunities for continual customer feedback
(e.g., local community boards that solicit comments directly from
customers, roundtable discussions)
  - Advocate for policy changes that can remove barriers to or further
enhance good customer experience
- Publish insights and recommendations along with your methodology and
approach for distribution to agency leadership and/or the public
- Contribute articles to blogs/newsletters about your activities to spread the word
and raise visibility
- Where possible, keep the people you interviewed aware of your findings to close
the loop—delivering a good customer experience for those who helped with your
research
- Brief key stakeholders on actionable recommendations they can take to improve
customer experience
- Understand the capacity of stakeholders for implementing recommendations
- Work with stakeholders to prioritize recommendations
- Plan to implement changes
- Data: Review interview notes and evaluate results from prioritization
activities (e.g., card sorting exercise)
- Tools:
  - Use techniques such as mind mapping to synthesize raw notes and
identify key insights
  - Write stories that represent different customer experiences to help
people better relate to the findings
  - Prepare a brief to share recommendations with stakeholders
  - Use methods like an impact/effort matrix to prioritize
implementation opportunities
- Engagement:
  - Meet routinely with the team(s) responsible for implementing
recommendations to share insights and support prioritization of
activities
  - Develop relationships with content channel owners to publish your
materials, artifacts, and findings with stakeholders and customers
along the way
<h3>Key Questions</h3>  
- How can the customer experience improve?
- How will you share your findings with a broader
audience to gain visibility and implement
recommendations?
  
<h2><a id="Play6"></a>Play 6: Build an Internal CX Standard Operating Procedure/Capability</h2>
A successful CX engagement in an organization can often lead to
others—but only if people know what you’ve done, what you can
do, and how your CX expertise can help them. Your goal is to raise
awareness, capability, and demand for CX in your organization.
<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Identify the CX services your team can support,
such as workshops, ethnographic research,
surveys, journey mapping, Voice of the Customer
practice, human-centered design, service design,
consultation, customer data synthesis, etc.
- Make the offerings flexible enough to meet your
clients’ unique demands, but standard enough so
you can offer them consistently
- Publish the internal CX standard operating
procedures (SOPs) to give to prospective clients
and leadership
- Meet with department heads and suggest areas
that customer experience practices can help with
their business objectives
- Data:
  - Catalog prior and ongoing CX efforts to date
  - Evaluate your staff’s skills and project experience
- Tools:
  - Create repeatable processes and products that
you can provide in customer experience engagements
  - Prepare templates for frequently used activities
- Engagement:
  - Share the standard operating procedures (SOPs)
manual as you assemble it with your stakeholders
  - Get feedback from clients regarding work your team has performed
<h3>Key Question</h3>  
- Do potential partners know the work your team can support?
  
<h2><a id="Play7"></a>Play 7: Measure What Matters</h2>
The right analytics are meaningful, tell a coherent story,
and lead to key insights and better decisions. Here’s how
to make sure that the metrics you develop lead your
organization to quantifiable, sustainable improvements.
<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Review your goals and work backwards to identify metrics that measure progress towards
those goals. For inspiration, look at:
  - The moments that matter in the customer’s journey to help validate the
impact of any efforts to improve the customer experience affecting those moments
  - Failure demand, such as spikes in calls to the contact center, where customers have
self-identified pain points in their experience
  - Your agency’s defined performance metrics and/or Cross-Agency Priority goals
  - The OMB A-11 Circular section 280 for recommended customer experience metrics
https://www.performance.gov/cx/
- Make the metric **relevant**— tie it to a specific customer transaction, not just the customer’s
relationship with your agency
- Adjust the metric to keep data **unbiased**. For example, customer satisfaction is influenced by
the nature of the activity—paying taxes will have a lower satisfaction score than visiting
national parks—so ask questions about the process instead of the outcome (e.g., Did you
understand the requirements? How easy was the process? Were agents pleasant/helpful? Were
issues resolved soon enough? Did you understand the factors that affected your outcome? Did
you trust the individuals you worked with?)
- Keep the metric **simple** so it can be easily understood, tell a clear story, and enable decision
makers to gather what actions can be taken to reach the corresponding goal. To stay effective,
keep surveys simple—ask few questions and ask straightforward questions
- Assign an **owner** to each metric. Without someone accountable for acting on it, the metric is
worthless
- Clarify the **action**(s) that the agency can take to improve based on the metric’s outcome (e.g.,
an increase or decrease in value). Don’t measure something if you can’t change the outcome
- Decide how often the metric will be reviewed. The more **timely** the metric, the more effective
any actions related to it will be
- To assure trust in the data, capture **reference** information about each metric, such as when last
updated, from which system(s), how it was calculated, etc.
- Find the best **source** for your metric:
  - Qualitative methods like open text surveys and social media posts.
  - Quantitative methods like website analytics and contact center data.
- For each metric, establish a baseline to compare to future results to understand how your
initiatives are affecting customer experience
- Identify a way to check the pulse to understand how initiatives you undertake to improve
customer experience impacts the customer satisfaction
- Find opportunities to integrate customer feedback data from other channels, programs, and
business areas to provide a more rounded view of the customer experience (i.e., Voice of the
Customer)
- Data:
  - Review contact center data for customer pain points
  - Review existing data sources for customer feedback
- Tools:
  - Review the Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) guidelines before suggesting new
surveys
  - Review the customer journey map
  - Implement a tool to integrate feedback mechanisms and provide a central
reporting approach for the Voice of the Customer results
  - Review the OMB circular A-11 section 280 for the questions dierent services
should ask about customer experience (see Resources: Understand CX/De
sign Standards)
  - Use general surveys GSA provides to jump start your feedback collection
- Engagement:
  - Develop relationships with those responsible for customer feedback across
different channels to get their buy-in and support
  - Hold workshops with feedback channel owners and business intelligence
leads to improve data collection agency-wide
<h3>Key Questions</h3>  
- Are you asking customers the right questions?
- Are you collecting the right metrics in the right way?
- Are your efforts making a difference for the customer?
  
<h2><a id="Play8"></a>Play 8: Analyze and Publish Metrics</h2>
Even the best-crafted analytics have little value if they
don’t reach the right people. Make sure your analytics are
used to make data-driven decisions. Give them to
stakeholders and decision makers with the context they
need to understand them.
<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Analyze metrics for insights and success
stories, however incremental, to share with
agency leadership and build momentum
- Share the metrics routinely with stakeholders
and decision makers to prioritize work and
drive changes towards meeting stated goals
- Use success stories and quick wins, framed
with customer-centric achievements, as a way
to gain support for more investment
- Data:
  - Obtain data from various channels pertaining to
the customer experience, including website
analytics, survey data, contact center data, social
media data
- Tools:
  - Develop a dashboard for access to important
metrics and share it with decision makers and
possibly the public
  - Publish interesting results in agency blogs and
newsletters
- Engagement:
  - Present metrics to decision makers to provide
more context for business prioritization
  - Use measurement as an opportunity to maintain
contact with the business
<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- With whom are you sharing your metrics to
highlight successes and drive business
decisions?
- How are you sharing your metrics?
- How transparent are your metrics?

<h2><a id="Play9"></a>Play 9: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle</h2>
Maintain your analytics and reporting so they stay relevant while
business requirements, environmental factors, and customer
expectations change. If your organization isn’t regularly using your
reporting to make content improvements, you need to re-examine
your reports.
<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Evaluate existing qualitative (e.g., surveys) and
quantitative (e.g., website metrics) measures and
methods for usefulness.
- Each metric should be
  - goal-oriented to provide a target,
  - relevant to a specific customer transaction,
  - unbiased by the outcome of a customer’s
transaction,
  - simple to understand and act on,
owned by a responsible business owner,
  - actionable so undesired outcomes can be
corrected,
  - timely with an appropriate frequency to make
eective decisions,
- Form a working group to routinely evaluate the metrics
for eectiveness, comply with government standards,
and align with industry trends
- Choose the disposition for each metric:
  - Keep metrics that are still useful
  - Discard metrics that are not useful or
no longer needed
  - Modify metrics that can be improved
  - Add metrics that are missing
- Data:
  - Review data from various channels for the
customer experience, including website
analytics, survey data, contact center data,
social media data
- Tools:
Poll decision makers to learn which metrics they
find useful
- Engagement:
  - Hold workshops with program and agency
leadership, channel owners, and other stake
holders to evaluate the metrics
<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- How useful are the metrics?
- Are any adjustments needed?

<h2><a id="Play10"></a>Play 10: Get Your Bearings</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play11"></a>Play 11: Build a Partnership</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play12"></a>Play 12: Establish Your Foundation</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play13"></a>Play 13: Foster a Customer-Centric Mindset</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h3><a id="Download"></a>{% include download_pdf.html download_title="Download the Data & Analytics Playbook (PDF, 1 MB)"
    download_url="docs/2019-09-Web-Lydia-Journey.pdf" %}</h3>
    
<a href="{{site.baseurl}}/coe/data-analytics.html#coe-updates" class="usa-button">More Data & Analytics Posts</a>
