---
title: "How to Avoid the Red Queen Effect"
layout: post
initiative: Artificial Intelligence
date: March 17, 2020
---
By the Artificial Intelligence Center of Excellence

**“Now, here, you see, it takes all the running you can do just to keep in the same place. If you want to get somewhere else, you
must run at least twice as fast.” - The Red Queen Theory**

Technology modernization is bound by objectives, metrics, programs, and budgets, with often no explicit incentives for experimentation 
or rewards for innovation. Leaning in to AI challenges the federal government to adopt an innovation mindset and rethink how 
work has been done in the past. Committing to  investing in innovation creates a window to test the latest techniques while 
incorporating successful tests into the broader organization. Running “twice as fast” demands a systematic, dedicated effort.
 
Accelerating adoption of artificial intelligence across the federal government requires agencies to shift how technology modernization
is viewed with respect to daily operations. We believe in a mindset that moves beyond the modernization conversation, by providing 
an <a href="https://www.gsa.gov/blog/2020/02/20/moving-beyond-modernization-adapt-to-better-serve-the-public">adaptable environment that prioritizes innovation</a> to better serve the public.

Learn more about the Centers of Excellence and our AI offerings by visiting <a href="https://coe.gsa.gov/">coe.gsa.gov</a>. Follow us on Twitter <a href="https://twitter.com/GSACoE">@GSACoE</a> to join our ongoing conversations about AI in government.

<a href="{{site.baseurl}}/coe/artificial-intelligence.html#coe-updates" class="usa-button">More AI Posts</a>
