---
title: "Data and Analytics Playbook"
layout: post
initiative: Data and Analytics
date: August 12, 2020
---
By the Data and Analytics Center of Excellence

- <a href="#Introduction">Introduction</a>
- <a href="#Key Concepts">Key Concepts</a>
- <a href="#Play1">Play 1: Define a Vision</a>
- <a href="#Play2">Play 2: Obtain Leadership & Stakeholder Commitment</a>
- <a href="#Play3">Play 3: Evaluate the Current State</a>
- <a href="#Play4">Play 4: Develop Future State Requirements</a>
- <a href="#Play5">Play 5: Conduct a Gap Analysis</a>
- <a href="#Play6">Play 6: Create an Implementation Roadmap</a>
- <a href="#Play7">Play 7: Establish a Data Governance Structure</a>
- <a href="#Play8">Play 8: Create An Enterprise Data Model</a>
- <a href="#Play9">Play 9: Emphasize Rapid Prototyping</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 10: Embrace Continuous Process Improvement</a>

<h2><a id="Introduction"></a>Introduction</h2>
Building mature data analytics organizations across government is a necessary step to achieve the Cross-Agency Priority (CAP) goal of leveraging data as a strategic asset that will increase the federal government’s effectiveness, facilitate oversight, and promote transparency.

The Data Analytics Center of Excellence (CoE) drives innovation in data management, analysis and reporting for partner agencies. Its overarching goal is to enable data-driven decision-making.

The team developed this 10-play Playbook so agencies can lead more effective government policies and programs. While not every play will apply to your agency, they will help you strive towards more data-driven decisions.

The Data Analytics CoE developed this Playbook according to relevant laws, policies, and guidance, including the newly released Federal Data Strategy and OMB Circular A-11. The relevant directives provide the fundamental framework by which the CoE conducts discovery and implementation.

<h2><a id="Key Concepts"></a>Key Concepts</h2>
Throughout this document, we will refer to the following key concepts:

- **Advanced Analytics** - Using tools and technologies to predict future trends
(i.e., predictive data analytics, data mining, and artificial intelligence (AI) efforts).
- **Data Culture** - Organizational investment in data analytics capacity; cultivation of an environment where all staff are encouraged to use data to make key decisions.
- **Data Governance** - The practice of data management to ensure high data quality; key focus areas include data availability, usability, integrity, and security.
- **Data Infrastructure** - Collection of technologies (e.g., hardware, software, cloud services) used for data sharing and utilization.
- **Data Visualization** - Using visual elements (e.g., charts or graphs) to quickly consume key information.
- **Technical Infrastructure** - Collection of hardware, software, networks, cloud resources, data centers, etc., used to support information technology (IT) services.

<h2><a id="Play1"></a>Play 1: Define a Vision</h2>
Define a clear	and realistic vision of your organization’s near-term	and long-term goals for
data analytics.	You’ll be able to assess the maturity level of your organization’s data analytics.

<h3>Checklist</h3>
- At a high level, document the types of concrete outcomes that would contribute to mission success
- Develop and continue to refine the overarching vision statement and conceptual framework to explain what data analytics could mean to the organization, in both the near and long-term
- Are all key mission areas involved in defining the vision?
<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- Who are your main internal and external customers?
- What are their primary business goals? 
- What data limitations keep your organization from achieving success?
- What key improvements do you intend to achieve in the near-term as well as long-term?
- What sort of data culture exists in your organization?

<h2><a id="Play2"></a>Play 2: Obtain Leadership & Stakeholder Commitment</h2> 
Obtaining stakeholder buy-in early ensures that participants understand desired outcomes and the requirements to achieve those outcomes. This buy-in requires a more open and transparent approach to exposing data and a decision-making structure that emphasizes the important role of, and improvement to, the tools that support it.
<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Develop an introductory document with high-level vision, project scope, and timeline
- Align project scope with the organization’s vision
- Document high-level outcomes without listing overly prescriptive deliverables or achievement
- Involve leadership from all key areas: IT, business lines, communications, web, customer service, human resources, and finance
- Set realistic expectations for progress and ensure sustained commitment from leadership
- Provide regular updates on progress, challenges, and next steps
<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- Who are the key organizational stakeholders?
- Did you include at least one executive or decision-maker from every core business area?
- Does each team understand its roles/responsibilities? Do the stakeholders share a cohesive vision?
- Is there a clear and effective management structure to coordinate and enable data-related or data-dependent projects across the organization?
- Does the team agree about the outcomes and their feasibility?
- Have you identified data champions within the organization who can engage across teams?



<h2><a id="Play3"></a>Play 3: Evaluate the Current State</h2> 
A current state analysis involves reviewing existing business functions, activities, and technology implementations that the business has either already carried out or plans to carry out. Assess current technical infrastructure and stakeholder roles in existing business processes to evaluate success areas, areas of improvement, and challenges.
<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Conduct interviews and workshops with leadership and program-level staff to identify the key workflows, stakeholders, technology, and systems
- Develop workflows outlining the current systems, process flows, platforms, and application portfolio
- Capture how current system owners interact with existing business processes or data systems, current data and analytics-related policies, and standards
- Document stakeholder-identified success areas and pain points or challenges that impede their work
- Document similarities and common systems across business functions
- Assess the skills that employees acquire through on-the-job training that add value to the organization (i.e., human capital assessment)
- What do the Data and Analytics Practices across major mission areas look like?
<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- Who are your organizational stakeholders? Who are your customers and end users?
- Who are the most competent subject-matter experts (SMEs) in your organization for given data assets or analytics applications?
- What are your data assets (e.g., databases)? What is your technical infrastructure?
- What are the processes currently used to manage data flows?
- Who owns them?
- Is there existing documentation?
- What are the current training processes? Is the training’s impact being monitored?
- Are there planned technology acquisitions or staff hires?

<h2><a id="Play4"></a>Play 4</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play5"></a>Play 5</h2>
<h3>Checklist</h3>
<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play6"></a>Play 6</h2>
<h2><a id="Play7"></a>Play 7</h2>
<h2><a id="Play8"></a>Play 8</h2>
<h2><a id="Play9"></a>Play 9</h2>
<h2><a id="Play10"></a>Play 10</h2>


<a href="{{site.baseurl}}/coe/data-analytics.html#coe-updates" class="usa-button">More Data & Analytics Posts</a>
