---
title: "Thirteen Plays of Our Customer Experience Approach"
layout: post
initiative: Customer Experience
date: October 5, 2020
---
By the Customer Experience Center of Excellence

<h2>Contents:</h2>
- <a href="#Introduction">Introduction</a>
- <a href="#Key Concepts">Key Concepts</a>
- <a href="#Play1">Play 1: Choose Your Projects Strategically</a>
- <a href="#Play2">Play 2: Set Goals and Expectations</a>
- <a href="#Play3">Play 3: Identify Your Customers</a>
- <a href="#Play4">Play 4: Walk in Your Customer’s Shoes</a>
- <a href="#Play5">Play 5: Share and Act on Recommendations</a>
- <a href="#Play6">Play 6: Build a Service Catalog</a>
- <a href="#Play7">Play 7: Measure What Matters</a>
- <a href="#Play8">Play 8: Analyze and Publish Metrics</a>
- <a href="#Play9">Play 9: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 10: Get Your Bearings</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 11: Build a Partnership</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 12: Establish Your Foundation</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 13: Foster a Customer-Centric Mindset</a>
- <a href="#Download">Related Resources</a>

<h2><a id="Introduction"></a>Introduction</h2>
Customer Experience (CX) is not new; industry has been doing CX for a long time. Agencies may already be applying some or all of these best practices. 

What is new is the government’s central focus on CX with efforts such as the  President’s Management Agenda (PMA) for improving customer experience, the 21st Century Integrated Digital Experience Act (IDEA), and the Federal Agency Customer Experience (FACE) Act  to support CX practices. All of these efforts emphasize the government’s focus on improving the customer experience with accessing information and services. 

The Customer Experience Center of Excellence (CoE) works to develop a better understanding of customer needs. The CX-CoE team is translating those findings into action. The team developed this 13-play Playbook for practitioners in all levels of government to establish or improve CX practices, and to foster a CX mindset within—and across—government agencies. While not every play will apply, they can help your agency get started with small, quick wins to build up expertise and gain confidence. 

This playbook represents a synthesis of ideas gathered from interviewing several subject-matter experts (SMEs) and leaders in CX and Human-Centered Design (HCD). This synthesis is according to  relevant laws, policies, and guidance, including the updated OMB Circular A-11 “Managing Customer Experience and Improving Service Delivery.” Whether you are just curious about CX, already dabbling in CX, or a professional CX practitioner, this playbook can offer insight to enhance your agency’s  CX presence.

<h2><a id="Key Concepts"></a>Key Concepts</h2>
Throughout this document, we will refer to the following key concepts:
- Framework – A set of methodologies and approaches for delivering a product/service
  - Human-Centered Design (HCD): A framework of processes that integrates a broad set of practices around understanding the needs, wants, and limitations of people interacting with a product/service, and that involves those people in the design process. It includes User-Centered Design (UCD), which deals with a person’s interaction with a digital product.
- Methodologies – A set of rules governing the design effort, depending on the focus
  - Human-Centered-Design (HCD): A broad application of HCD to focus on the entire customer’s journey to achieve a particular outcome, and identify their pain points and moments of delight to help prioritize design tasks. HCD encompasses other methods as needed.
  - Service Design: Focuses on understanding and improving the quality of various interactions among users, employees, and any supporting staff behind the scenes to deliver a service.
  - User Experience (UX)/User Interface (UI) Design: Related disciplines focusing respectively on the end-user’s experience with specific digital products as part of their overall journey, and how the user gets information from, and interacts with specific applications and websites.
- Approach - Outlines the specific process used to execute the design and development
  - Design Thinking: General human-centered methodology of discover, design, prototype, test, implement, and repeat. Intensely collaborative and iterative with a goal to develop something useful to end users. 
  - Data:
    - Quantitative: Focused on quantifying the problem by way of generating numerical data or data that can be transformed into usable insights. It quantifies attitudes, opinions, behaviors, and other defined variables and generalizes results from a larger sample population. 
    - Qualitative: Focused on establishing answers to the whys and hows of questions (unlike quantitative). Qualitative research involves asking participants about their experiences of things that happen in their lives. It enables stakeholders to obtain insights into what it feels like to be another person and to understand the world as another experiences it.  Findings are described in writing, rather than numbers.
    - Operational: Measures the efficiency and effectiveness of an organization. Establish key performance metrics such as  key performance indicators (KPI), return on investment (ROI), quality assurance, marketing outcomes, 


<h2><a id="Play1"></a>Play 1: Choose Your Projects Strategically</h2>
As you start, find a range of projects that can benefit the most from CX methods. Look for those key customer challenges that have high visibility and high impact, but lack a key owner. You must be able to tackle these key challenges in small sections so you can gain quick wins. Succeeding in the right initial projects will help build trust in your capabilities and prove the value of CX at your agency.

<h3>Checklist</h3>
- Use data to help identify these:
  - Leadership’s high-visibility initiatives 
  - Opportunities to save money (e.g., consolidating similar surveys)
  - Persistent customer issues
  - Existing metrics that could use a CX perspective (e.g., call-center data, operational KPI data, any customer/employee survey data)
- Look for projects that have high customer impact but require low effort to get traction (e.g., save customers time, make things easier, decrease employee burden) 
- Start small and get quick wins to gain confidence, build trust, and generate momentum. Focus on one or two customer needs instead of their entire journey while you learn the techniques and develop expertise
- Find projects that will have concrete results and  measure their real change or progress over time.  
- Data:
  - Gather data about where the most customer interactions are concentrated
  - Find out which programs fund the most services
  - Obtain report of dollars currently spent on customer feedback and contact centers
  - Collect reports from contact centers of high-volume customer pain points
  - Create journey maps to identify high-impact customer pain points
  - Review existing key performance indicators (KPIs) and metrics
- Tools:
  - Review current CX government-wide resources and match to leadership goals
  - Prepare an impact/effort matrix for potential projects to find high-impact, low-effort options
  - Compare existing survey tools to identify opportunities to reduce duplication or overlap
- Engagement:
  - Find out from leaders which projects they prioritize
  - Understand customer engagement, team missions, and rules and regulations to identify partnerships opportunity 

<h3>Key Questions</h3>
- Which projects can show high value with the least effort and cost?

<h2><a id="Play2"></a>Play 2: Set Goals and Expectations</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play3"></a>Play 3: Identify Your Customerss</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play4"></a>Play 4: Walk in Your Customer’s Shoes</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play5"></a>Play 5: Share and Act on Recommendations
</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play6"></a>Play 6: Build a Service Catalog</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play7"></a>Play 7: Measure What Matters</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play8"></a>Play 8: Analyze and Publish Metrics</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play9"></a>Play 9: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play10"></a>Play 10: Get Your Bearings</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play11"></a>Play 11: Build a Partnership</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play12"></a>Play 12: Establish Your Foundation</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>

<h2><a id="Play13"></a>Play 13: Set Goals and Expectations</h2>

<h3>Checklist</h3>

<h3>Key Questions</h3>



