---
title: "Nine Plays of Our Infrastructure Optimization Approach"
layout: post
initiative: Infrastructure Optimization
date: September 19, 2020
---
By the Infrastructure Optimization Center of Excellence

<h2>Contents:</h2>
- <a href="#Introduction">Introduction</a>
- <a href="#Key Concepts">Key Concepts</a>
- <a href="#Play1">Play 1: Define the Objectives, Roles, and Responsibilities for Infrastructure Optimization</a>
- <a href="#Play2">Play 2: Conduct a Data Center Discovery Assessment</a>
- <a href="#Play3">Play 3: Conduct Application Rationalization</a>
- <a href="#Play4">Play 4: Consolidate Data Centers</a>
- <a href="#Play5">Play 5: Obtain Authority to Test/Operate</a>
- <a href="#Play6">Play 6: Achieve Operational Excellence</a>
- <a href="#Play7">Play 7: Create an Agile Infrastructure</a>
- <a href="#Play8">Play 8: Implement Automation</a>
- <a href="#Play9">Play 9: Develop a Communication Plan</a>
- <a href="#Play10">Play 10: Ensure Ongoing Executive Reporting and Interaction</a>
- <a href="#Download">Related Resources</a>

<h2><a id="Introduction"></a>Introduction</h2>
As the public sector continues to modernize its technology, agencies continue to increase demand on their IT infrastructures. Rather than rely on meeting this new demand in the face of flat or reduced budgets, the pace of innovation has created opportunities to optimize infrastructure and create better service, while improving efficiency and generating savings simultaneously. 

The Infrastructure Optimization Center of Excellence (CoE) helps optimize data data centers and reduce infrastructure costs. We developed this 10-play Playbook for federal government agencies who are looking for help as they develop and implement  infrastructure optimization, integrated cloud computing, and data center consolidation strategies. 

While not every play will apply to your agency, these plays can help you position your agency for future infrastructure improvements. The Infrastructure Optimization CoE developed this Playbook in accordance with relevant laws, policies, and guidance.


<h2><a id="Key Concepts"></a>Key Concepts</h2>
Throughout this document, we will refer to the following key concepts:
- **A&A -** stands for Assessment and Authorization. Assessment and Authorization is a two-step process that ensures security of information systems.
- **Application disposition -** the placement in a particular output quadrant (tolerated, invested, migrated or eliminated) of the application rationalization analysis.
- **Application rationalization -** the practice of strategically identifying business applications across an organization to determine which applications should be kept, replaced, retired or consolidated.
- **KPI -** stands for Key Performance Indicator. It’s a measurable value that demonstrates how effectively a company is achieving key business objectives. 
- **Landing zone -** a configured environment with a standard set of secured cloud infrastructure, policies, best practices, guidelines and centrally managed services.

