---
title: "Strategic Foresight Workshop Series asks, “How do you Imagine Your Future?”’"
layout: post
initiative: Innovation Adoption
date: October 03, 2022
---
By the Innovation Adoption Practice 

*CoE Innovation Adoption (IA) practice has published Strategic [Foresight 101: Introduction to Strategic Foresight Methodologies](https://coe.gsa.gov/docs/StrategicForesight101.pdf). In June 2022, they hosted a pilot workshop series about strategic and design futures methods with 57 federal employees from 26 organizations. The IA practice blends traditional organizational change management practices with evidence-based principles such as behavioral science-constituted foresight methods. The guide and accompanying workshop series was designed to introduce participants to foresight fundamentals so they can better anticipate risk and proactively prepare for the future.*

In May 2022, OPM released a [Federal Workforce Priorities Report](https://chcoc.gov/sites/default/files/2022-Federal-Workforce-Priorities-Report-FWPR.pdf) identifying eight workforce priorities – four primary and four enabling, and tasked agencies with choosing two to help improve their workforce over the next four years. Priority 8, ‘Developing an Agency Foresight Capability,’ was listed as a primary priority. It includes:

- Leveraging the power of foresight to minimize surprise
- Creating anticipatory governance and planning culture
- Conducting future scenario planning 
- Identifying emerging skills and future challenges 

<h2>What is Strategic Foresight?</h2>

The future is not on a single track, and because it holds infinite scenarios, today’s strategies must be adaptable and resilient. Foresight is a structured and systematic way to use ideas about the future to anticipate and better prepare for a variety of change. 

The strategic foresight process is a structured and systemic human-centered strategic approach to problem-solving and risk management in anticipation of a variety of future states. It allows practitioners to think of what is possible, preferable and ultimately possible in order to make strategic choices today that help position an organization to succeed with those futures in mind.

<h2>Consider the possibilities</h2>
In the first workshop, participants received an overview of the foresight process including key steps in the process, outputs, and how they might be applied in their organizations.   

While exploring different methods, they considered the following:

- How do we best think about the actions we are working on today, tomorrow and the next five years, to ensure we are on a path for success to a future that we hope to see?
- What are the possible risks of our preferred futures?
- What amazing possibilities have we not considered? 

Some participants shared where they are in the process and spoke of their experience co-designing future scenarios with their teams.

<h2>Break it down</h2>
The second workshop featured “hands on” exercises for participants to practice and think through risks, pitfalls and possibilities. 

Conversations centered around how foresight invites a lot of divergent opinions, and how an ideal future for one may be a nightmare for another. Scenarios were built around what the future looks like for whom, their potential impact and the reactions of diverse perspectives. 

One comment was that foresight work is great fun. It’s breaking things down and reimagining – if this is the future, what does it all have to look like – technical infrastructure, roads, facilities, structures, etc.? All aspects are considered from how best to foresee risk to how might you navigate unaccounted for events.

<h2>Capture and apply knowledge</h2>
The third session provided an open forum for discussion and questions and answers.  The conversation centered around organizational knowledge:  

- Who has the knowledge you need? 
- What feels most relevant for the space?
- How will you implement information into existing structures?

Over the course of the three sessions participants gained a basic understanding of what foresight is, and how it might be applied, learning tips and techniques that will “put knowledge into practice.”   

June’s IA Strategic Foresight 101 workshop series was inaugural. The next Strategic Foresight 101 workshop is planned for Fall 2022. The workshops are part of CoE’s new collection of [Resources & Advisory Support](https://coe.gsa.gov/2022/05/20/coe-update-4.html). 
