---
description: Artificial intelligence (AI) refers to the computational techniques that simulate human cognitive capabilities. AI will transform most, if not every aspect of humanity, which presents a range of challenges and opportunities. 
slug: introduction
title: Introduction to the AI Guide for Government 
redirect_from:
  - /coe/ai-guide-for-government/
  - /ai-guide-for-government/

---

Artificial Intelligence (AI) refers to the computational techniques that simulate human cognitive capabilities. AI will transform most, if not every aspect of humanity, which presents a range of challenges and opportunities. 
{: .intro }

AI has already revolutionized the business world. Its application across the federal government is fundamentally changing the way agencies meet their mission. **The U.S. government must embrace these opportunities head-on to remain on the leading edge and stay competitive.**

This AI Guide for Government is intended to help government decision makers clearly see what AI means for their agencies and how to invest and build AI capabilities.
{: .ai-gfg-feature }

Because AI is such a broad term to describe new and emerging applications, we’ve broken the AI Guide for Government into different chapters. At this time, the Guide does not include technical sections. 

The AI Guide will help leaders understand what to consider as they invest in AI and lay the foundation for its enterprise-wide use. It helps leaders understand the types of problems that are best suited for the application of AI technologies, think through the building blocks they require to take advantage of AI, and how to apply AI to use cases at the project level. It also explains how to do so responsibly. 
