---
description: Following the February 2019 Executive Order on Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence and the September 2019 White House Summit on AI in Government, GSA’s Technology Transformation Service (TTS) established a team focused on artificial intelligence (AI) in government. 
slug: ai-community-of-practice
title: TTS & The Federal AI Community of Practice
---
Following the February 2019 Executive Order on Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence and the September 2019 White House Summit on AI in Government, GSA’s Technology Transformation Service (TTS) established a team focused on artificial intelligence (AI) in government. 
{: .intro }

TTS exists to improve the lives of the public and public servants by transforming how the government uses technology. Within this mission the TTS AI Portfolio exists to help federal agencies deliver better services and experiences, and achieve their respective missions through the investment in, and the appropriate and responsible application of AI. 

At the time of this writing in Fall 2021, we have four areas of focus:

## Product development 
This AI for Government Body of Knowledge / Modules for AI in Government is one initial product that the TTS AI Portfolio plans to develop from a broader array of products and platforms. We will continue to provide resources and build products and platforms that support our overall mission. This body of knowledge will continue to evolve over time as the field of AI evolves, both in general and in a government context.

## Community development
We use the Artificial Intelligence Community of Practice (AI CoP) to share use cases and lessons learned. As federal agencies embark on or continue their journey to the full scale use of AI, the AI CoP is the destination to share how AI  tools and technologies can help them achieve their mission. 

## Implementation and delivery 
The AI Center of Excellence combines private sector innovation and government services to use best practices and expertise to help agencies implement AI capabilities. 

## Private sector engagement 
Create partnerships and collaboration across a broad range of academia, industries, non-profits, and think tanks.







