---
description: Artificial intelligence (AI) refers to the computational techniques that simulate human cognitive capabilities. AI will transform most, if not every aspect of humanity, which presents a range of challenges and opportunities. 
slug: introduction-to-guide
title: Introduction to the AI Guide for Government 
---
Artificial intelligence (AI) refers to the computational techniques that simulate human cognitive capabilities. AI will transform most, if not every aspect of humanity, which presents a range of challenges and opportunities. 
{: .intro }

AI has already revolutionized the business world. Its application across the federal government is fundamentally changing the way agencies meet their mission. **The U.S. government must embrace these challenges and opportunities head-on to remain on the leading edge and stay competitive.**

This Body of Knowledge is intended to help government decision makers clearly see what AI means for their agencies and how to invest and build AI capabilities. 
{: .ai-gfg-feature }


Because AI is such a broad term to describe new and emerging applications, we’ve broken the AI in the Government Body of Knowledge (BoK)BoK into different sections.  At this time, the BoK doesn’t include technical sections. 

The BoK will help  leaders understand what to consider as they invest in AI and lay the foundation for its enterprise-wide use. It helps leaders think through the building blocks they require to take advantage of AI, and to apply AI to a wide range of use cases at the project level. It also explains how to do so responsibly. 






