---
description: Organizational maturity areas represent the capacity to embed AI capabilities across the organization. 
slug: organizational-maturity-areas
title: Organizational maturity areas
---
Organizational maturity areas represent the capacity to embed AI capabilities across the organization. 
{: .intro }

The first approach is top down, generally used by senior leaders and executives. It’s influenced by the Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) system[^1] of evaluating organizational maturity. This particular top-down method helps you evaluate organizations. The top-down view in the table below is based on CMMI levels 1-5.

The second approach is user-centric, generally used by program and mission managers, who focus on delivery. It uses the CMMI system as an industry standard for evaluating organizational maturity. This bottom-up view is synthesized from CoE engagements with federal agency partners, market research, case study evaluation, and lessons learned. 

AI investment decision makers can analyze activities from a top-down, bottom up, or dual-view perspective.


## Top-Down, Organizational View
### Initial / Ad Hoc 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-1}
Process is unpredictable, poorly controlled, and unmanaged.

### Repeatable 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-2}
Process is documented and steps are repeatable with consistent results. Often reactionary.

### Defined
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-3}
Documented, standardized processes that are improved over time.

### Managed 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-4}
Activities are effectively measured, and meeting objectives are based on active management and evidence-based outcomes.
### Optimized 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-5}
Continuous performance improvement of activities through incremental and innovative improvements.


## Bottom-Up, User-centric View

### Individual 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-1}
No organizational team structure around activities. Self-organized and executed.

### Team Project 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-2}
A dedicated, functional team organized around process activities. Organized by skill set or mission.

### Program
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-3}
Group of related projects managed in a coordinated way. Introduction of structured program management.

### Portfolio 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-4}
Collection of projects, programs, and other operations that achieve strategic objectives.

### Enterprise 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-5}
Operational activities and resources are organized around enterprise strategy and business goals.

&nbsp;

### Footnotes
[^1]: “Draft 2019-2020 Federal Data Strategy Action Plan.” Federal Data Strategy Development Team. June 2019. Pg. 11. <https://strategy.data.gov/assets/docs/draft-2019-2020-federal-data-strategy-action-plan.pdf>
