---
description: Organizational maturity areas represent the capacity to embed AI capabilities across the organization. 
slug: organizational-maturity-areas
title: Organizational maturity areas
---
Organizational maturity areas represent the capacity to embed AI capabilities across the organization. 
{: .intro }


## Top-Down View


The first approach is influenced by the Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) system of evaluating organizational maturity. This particular top-down method helps you evaluate organizations. The top-down view in the table below is based on CMMI levels 1–5.

### Initial / Ad Hoc 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-1}
Process is unpredictable, poorly controlled, and unmanaged.

### Repeatable 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-2}
Process is documented and steps are repeatable with consistent results. Often reactionary.

### Defined
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-3}
Documented, standardized processes that are improved over time.

### Managed 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-4}
Activities are effectively measured, and meeting objectives are based on active management and evidence-based outcomes.
### Optimized 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-5}
Continuous performance improvement of activities through incremental and innovative improvements.


## Bottom-Up View

The second approach is user-centric. It uses the CMMI system as an industry standard for evaluating organizational maturity. This bottom-up view is synthesized from CoE engagements with federal agency partners, market research, case study evaluation, and lessons learned. 

### Individual 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-1}
No organizational team structure around activities. Self-organized and executed.

### Team Project 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-2}
A dedicated, functional team organized around process activities. Organized by skill set or mission.

### Program
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-3}
Group of related projects managed in a coordinated way. Introduction of structured program management.

### Portfolio 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-4}
Collection of projects, programs, and other operations that achieve strategic objectives.

### Enterprise 
{: .ai-ops-maturity-level-5}
Operational activities and resources are organized around enterprise strategy and business goals.


Senior leaders and executives generally evaluate organizational maturity from a top-down view. 

Program and mission managers focus on delivery. The bottom-up view reflects their perspective. AI investment decision makers can analyze activities from a top-down, bottom up, or dual-view perspective. These levels correspond to the top markers on the AI CMM table.

