---
description: Supervised classification supports cropland use estimation
slug: supervised-classification-cropland-use-estimation
title: "Supervised classification supports cropland use estimation"
---
The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) uses a decision-tree supervised classification method to create [CropScape - Cropland Data Layer (CDL)](https://nassgeodata.gmu.edu/CropScape/), a open source tool for identifying agricultural land cover.
{: .intro }

The CDL’s remote-sensing program provides acreage estimates on major commodities such as corn, tobacco, and soybeans, for the Agricultural Statistics Board (ASB). The ASB produces official estimates for commodities at state and county levels. The data drives CropScape and the associated Cropland Data Layer and allows analysts to determine planted acreage for specific crops. **Analysts can, for example, estimate the likely planted area for corn, soybeans, tobacco, peanuts, and more.** 

Cropland Data Layer is released annually on CropScape following the completion of the growing season. It provides crop mapping for over 100 crop types and is accurate 85 percent to 95 percent of the time for major crop categories.

## Background
In 2007-2008 NASS began using ground reference data sources on crop plantings and non-agricultural areas covering the entire U.S. Satellite imagery allows NASS to identify planted crops throughout the growing season by examining the spectral reflectance from crops. 

Spectral reflectance is like an optical fingerprint. This optical fingerprint results from the presence, shape, and position of objects on the surface, allowing researchers to determine the type of crop planted.
{: .ai-uca-feature }

The satellite imagery, combined with ground reference data, can be used to identify single, double, and, sometimes, triple crop plantings, as well as cover crops using a supervised training methodology. Additional data sets supplement and validate the satellite imagery, confirming areas not suitable for crops, such as those covered by forest canopy or impervious surfaces, such as streets, walkways, and roofs.


## Responsible AI

 - NASS is transparent about all aspects of its work, and produces assessments of accuracy. As part of this, they release a complementary confidence layer product to the land cover classification with each pixel noted with how well it fits into a class. That means that for each pixel on the map, they can estimate how confident they are that they are correctly representing the crop grown there.
 - They have gone through a 2020 national geospatial audit and documentation assessment.
 - They have a detailed process for how they check estimates and process problems when something is wrong with the estimates. 


## Where we go from here
NASS has several development goals they are pursuing:
 - As the prevalence of cell phones and the pandemic reduces the effectiveness of in-person surveys, NASS is looking at alternative ways to supplement and validate the data.
 - NASS is assessing the USDA’s EDAPT  (Enterprise Data Analytics Platform and Toolset) environment and determining whether it can be used to assist with early season estimates. 
 - NASS is planning on beginning to use Google’s Earth Engine. 
 - NASS would like to find the resources to allow them to collect satellite imagery in 10 meter resolution (instead of 30 meter).

